Part - 1
Note :  (i)  Answer all the questions.  (14×1=14)
(ii) Choose the most appropriate answer from the given four alternatives and write the option code and the corresponding answer.
Choose the appropriate synonyms for the italicised words.
1.	It is a 55 foot sailing vessel built indigenously in India.
(a)	artificially	(b) beautifully
(c) naturally	(d) badly
2.	The young bird kept calling her mother plaintively.
(a)	sadly	(b) happily
(c) vainly	(d) joyfully
3.	No one visits me, he said in an unperturbed
manner.
(a)	disturbed	(b) undisturbed
(c) confused	(d) undivided
Choose the appropriate antonyms for the italicised words.
4.	Scraping his beak now and again to whet it.
(a)	blunt	(b) harden
(c) brighten	(d) smoothen
5.	Nothing he said, gruffly, but he was, in colour, a light green.
(a)	unhappily	(b) happily
(c) sadly	(d) worriedly
6.	The disabled face challenges of access, acceptance and inclusion.
(a)	induction	(b) intuition
(c) exclusion	(d) extension
7.	Choose the correct plural form of 'radius'
(a)	radio	(b) radii
(c) radious	(d) radie
1
 

8.	Form a derivative by adding the right prefix to the word 'nutrition'.
(a) fall	(b) fell	(c) mal	(d) call
9.	Choose the correct expansion of the abbreviation
'HDMI'.
(a)	Hide Dimension Metro India
(b)	High Dimension Media Institute
(c)	High Definition Multimedia Interface
(d)	High Definition Medieval India
10.	Complete the following sentence with the most appropriate phrasal verb given below.
Priya felt happy to 	 the neighbours in the new locality of California.
(a)	get along with	(b) get on
(c) get away	(d) get together
11.	Choose the suitable option to pair it with the word
'traffic' to form a compound word.
(a)	bus	(b) car
(c) jam	(d) post
12.	Fill in the blank with the most appropriate preposition given below.
I reached M. Hamel's garden, all out 	 breath.
(a)	on	(b) of
(c) by	(d) with
13.	Complete the following sentence using the most appropriate tense form of the verb given below.
I had such a shock when the dying man bolted the door and 	 it.
(a)	locked	(b) lock
(c) had locked	(d) have locked
14.	Choose the most appropriate linker from the given four alternatives.
We are on our way to Kolkata 	 Chennai.
(a)	by	(b) from
(c) of	(d) with

Part - 2
SECTION - 1
Answer any three of the following questions in a
sentence or two.	(3×2=6)
15.	What prompted the young seagull to fly finally?
16.	Mention the special features of INSV Tarini.
17.	What did Aditya offer Sanyal?
18.	What was the doctor's warning to Tom?

SECTION - 2 
Read the following sets of poetic lines and answer
any three of the following.	(3×2=6)
19.	Let us learn to walk with a smile and a song, No matter if things do sometimes go wrong,
(a)	What does the poet expect everyone to learn?
(b)	What should we do when things go wrong sometimes?
20.	It never grows leaves,
Not in the winter, spring, summer or fall.
It just sits there never getting small or ever growing
tall.
(a)	What does 'it' refer to?
(b)	In what way is the tree a mystery?
21.	"Not I!
My heart was so light That I sang day and night, For all nature looked gay".
(a)	Who does "I" refer to?
(b)	What was the nature of the cricket?
22.	Rumors are constantly being made,
And each day the house just begins to fade. What happened inside that house?
(a)	Does the house remain the same everyday?
(b)	Why does the poet consider the house to be a mystery?

SECTION - 3
Answer any three of the following.	(3×2=6)
23.	Rewrite the sentence in Reported Speech. Banu says, "I am enjoying my holidays."
24.	Rewrite the following sentence in the other voice. Our army has defeated the enemy.
25.	Punctuate the following sentence. have you come from holmes he asked
26.	Change the following sentence into a Simple sentence.
She is sick but she attends the rehearsal.
 
27.	Rearrange the words in the correct order to make meaningful sentences.
(a)	Dangers / the mountain / of / is / road / full.
(b)	Can / get / when / winds / are / tough / sea / the / picking / really / up.

SECTION - 4
28.	Answer the following question.	(1×2=2)
You are at the Market. A stranger beside you asks for directions to go to the Pharmacy. Guide him with your instructions.
 
Part - 3 
SECTION - 1
Answer any two of the following in a paragraph.
(2×5=10)
29.	Describe the struggles underwent by the young seagull to overcome its fear of flying.
30.	Describe the funny incident that caused the confusion in the house.
31.	How do we use technology in our day to day lives?
32.	Explain the last day of M. Hamel in school.

SECTION - 2
Answer any two of the following.	(2×5=10)
33.	Describe the journey of life in the poem : "LLFE".
34.	The Poem "No men are foreign" has a greater relevance in today's world. Elucidate.
35.	Read the following stanza and answer the questions given below :
The weather is always too hot or cold; Summer and winter alike they scold. Nothing goes right with the folks you meet Down on that gloomy Complaining street
(a)	Pick out the rhyming words from the given stanza.
(b)	Give the rhyme scheme for the given stanza.
(c)	Identify the figure of speech in the fourth line.
(d)	Pick out the alliterating words in the second line.
36.	Paraphrase the following stanza.
Though our smoke may hide the Heavens from your eyes, It will vanish and the stars will shine again,
Because, for all our power and weight and size, We are nothing more than children of your brain!

SECTION - 3
Answer any one of the following.	(1×5=5)
37.	Rearrange the following sentences in coherent order.
(i)	Peter stops the angry waters with his finger the entire night and saves the village.
(ii)	Peter becomes the Little Hero of Holland.
(iii)	Little Peter was asked to take cakes for his blind friend by his mother.
(iv)	Peter realises the danger of flooding.
(v)	While returning, he hears water trickling from the dikes.
38.	Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow.
It was Zigzag’s voice, clear and commanding. There was pin-drop silence in the room as everyone waited, open-mouthed, for Zigzag’s next sentence. Dr. Krishnan was amazed! Gone was Zigzag’s bored and grumpy expression. Instead the bird looked happy and alert as it went about the job it had been trained for, first with the African witch doctor and then with Dr.Somu. Dr.Krishnan’s clinic, usually a noisy sea of tears and tantrums, was transformed into a calm, orderly place as Zigzag efficiently soothed the frightened patients, scolded the naughty ones and made the crying ones smile. And if his yam-digging song and recitation of French poetry reduced the children to helpless laughter instead of tears, he didn’t look as though he minded. And best of all, Zigzag never slept. Or snored. Even for a second!
Questions:
(a)	How was Zigzag's voice?
(b)	Mention the two expressions of Zigzag, mentioned in the above passage.
(c)	Who had trained Zigzag?
(d)	How was Dr. Krishnan's clinic transformed?
(e)	Zigzag never 	 or 	 even for a second.

SECTION - 4
Answer any four of the following.	(4×5=20)
39.	Prepare an attractive advertisement using the hints given below.
A collection of Rare books - More than 2000 books - Story - Fiction - 10 languages - 10% OFFER for school children - ANBU BOOK SHOP - No. 10 AVILA Convent Road - Ooty.
40.	Write a letter of enquiry for the following.
Rani hails from a remote village of Villupuram District, Tamil Nadu who aspires to become an IAS officer. Currently, she is in Class X. She notices an advertisement on free classes for the IAS aspirants by a trust in a newspaper. She writes a letter to the Coordinator of the trust asking for further details.
41.	You are the School Pupil Leader of GHSS Sathur. Your school H.M. has requested you to inform the students about a trip to Papanasam. Prepare a notice for the students.
42.	Look at the following picture and express your views on it in a paragraph of five sentences.

43.	Make notes or write a summary of the following passage.
Mountains have a great fascination for men and people. Mountain climbing, however, is not without risks. It is a challenge to the unconquerable spirit of man and his love of adventure. That it is a dangerous sport cannot be denied. As one climbs higher and higher, breathing becomes more and more difficult. Some climbers, therefore, carry a heavy apparatus from which they inhale oxygen. Mountain climbing is dangerous in the extreme. There are snow storms and blizzards. It is difficult to walk through the snow. It is still more difficult to climb on ice because it is difficult to get a foothold and cut steps with axes inorder to make progress. The cold is so severe that the climber's skin, feet, toes, fingers and tissues freeze, become numb and they may suffer frostbite. The most serious difficulty is the climber at a high altitude gets exhausted with a little effort. Mountain climbing requires proper training, skill and knowledge. The climbers must be well-equipped. They must be in good physical condition and should possess courage, perseverance and power of endurance. They should carry with them maps, compasses and other equipment so that they are able to find out where they are, in the absence of any tracks. They must travel through dense woods as they approach a mountain and then climb steep rocks. Near the summit of ahigh peak, the climbers have to move over snowfields and glaciers. In dangerous areas they use ropes to tie themselves in groups.
The climbers carry with them packs loaded with first-aid supplies, food and extra clothing for sudden changes in weather. They display a spirit of sportsmanship and fellow-feeling and face the severe risks of life undaunted.
44.	Identify the errors in the following sentences and rewrite them correctly.
(a)	Rice is a staple food of Asians.
(b)	Because Sathya was old, he walked slow.
(c)	Slow but steady wins the race.
(d)	I ought to be fifteen next April.
(e)	Learn a language is always useful.

SECTION - 5
45.	Quote from memory.	(1×5=5)
She's a lioness; ....................
.	Today's woman, dear.

Part - 4
46.	Write a paragraph of about 150 words by developing the following hints.	(2×8=16)
(a)	Many years ago China - war - Emperor - one man from each family - Mulan - village girl - father - young boy brother - cut off her long black hair
-	sword - Join army - proved brave soldier - bad fever - Doctor found - news spread - soldiers
- unhappy - Mulan - fights bravely - wins war
- Emperor glad - gifts - six fine horses - six fine swords.
(OR)
(b)	The year is 2889 - 25th July - Editor Earth Herald
- Francis Bennett - Phonotelephote - Champs - Elysees - wife telephotic mirror - Phototelegrams from Mercury, Venus and Mars - Jupiter - New planet Gandini - Mr. Bennett talks by means of apparatus - abandoned domestic cooking - pneumatic tubes - aero car - Niagara - aero train
-	Centropolis - 600 miles an hour.
47.	Read the following paragraph and answer the questions given below.
(a)	In 1902, American President Theodore Roosevelt, also known as Teddy, participated in a bear- hunting trip in Mississippi. While hunting, Roosevelt declared the behaviour of the other hunters "unsportsmanlike" after he refused to kill a bear they had captured. As news of the hunting trip spread, many newspapers around the country
featured political cartoons starring "Teddy" and "the bear". Meanwhile, in Brooklyn, New York, a shop owner named Morris Michtom saw one of the cartoons and had an idea. Michtom and his wife created plush, stuffed bears and placed them in the front window of their shop. With permission from Roosevelt, Michtom named the bears "Teddy Bears".
Questions :
(i)	Who participated in a bear-hunting trip in Mississippi?
(ii)	Where did Michtom place the stuffed bears?
(iii)	What was the news that spread around the Country about Teddy?
(iv)	Who is the shop owner? What did he do in his shop?
(OR)
(b)	Read the following poem and answer the questions given below :
What will you be? What will you be when you grow up? A dancer? or a doctor?
A teacher? or a cricketer?
There are so many careers you can choose to do
It's very very hard to decide you know Sometimes you may keep on thinking Doing many jobs and never deciding,
And on Sunday again you will keep wondering. Thursday you will chart the skies with the Navy. Questions :
(i)	What is hard to decide?
(ii)	List the jobs mentioned in the poem.
(iii)	Pick out the days of the week mentioned in the poem.
(iv)	What career would you like to choose in future?

