Part - 1
1.	(c) naturally	
2.  (a)  sadly
3.	(b) undisturbed	
4.  (a)  blunt
5.	(b) happily	
6.  (c)  exclusion
7.	(b) radii	
8.  (c) malnutrition
9.	(c) High Definition Multimedia Interface
10.	(a) get along with	
11. (c) traffic jam
12.	(b) of	
13. (a)  locked
14.	(b) from

Part - 2
SECTION - 1
15.	His mother picked up a piece of fish and flew across to him with it. But then, she halted, just opposite to him. She was almost within the reach of his beak. Maddened by hunger, the young seagull dived at the fish. This act of his mother prompted the young seagull to fly finally.
16.	INSV Tarini encourage the use of environment friendly non-conventional renewable energy resources Such as the wind. It collected data for monitoring marine pollution on high seas.
17.	Aditya offered Sanyal a sum of one hundred and fifty rupees.
18.	The doctor warned him that he would lose his mind, thinking a lot about the rubies.

SECTION - 2
19.	(a) The poet expects everyone to walk with a smile and a song.
(b)	We should not bother ourselves, if things go wrong sometimes.
20.	(a) 'It' refers to the tree.
(b)	The leaves of the tree never grows. The tree neither grows tall nor gets smaller. So the tree is a mystery.
21.	(a) ‘I’ refers to the cricket.
(b)	The nature of the cricket was lazy and silly.
22.	(a) No, the house does not remain the same everyday. It begins to fade each day.
(b)	Nobody knows what happened inside the house. So, the poetess considers the house to be a mystery.

SECTION - 3
23.	Banu says that she is enjoying her holidays.
24.	The enemy has been defeated by our army.
25.	"Have you come from Holmes?" he asked.
26.	Inspite of being sick, she attends the rehearsal.
27.	(a) The mountain road is full of dangers.
(b)	The sea can get really tough when winds are picking up.

SECTION - 4
28.	1.	From the market, go straight to Park Street.
2.	Take your left on the Central Road.
3.	At the end of the road, on your right, you will find the pharmacy.

Part - 3
SECTION - 1
29.	The young seagull was afraid of flying. His parents tried their level best to teach the young seagull to fly. The parents, brothers and sister thought of a plan to teach him to fly. They flew away to another rock and left him alone. They did not give him anything to eat. He stood there on one leg and closed his eyes. He was very hungry. He searched for food everywhere. He even chewed the dried pieces of the eggshells. He saw his mother tearing a piece of fish. He begged his mother to give him food. So the mother flew with the piece of fish to the young seagull. When she reached him, she became motionless in the air. She did not get down on the rock. She wanted to give the young seagull an incentive to fly. The seagull bent forward and jumped at the fish. He was very frightened. But he began to flap his wings to save himself.

30.	James, the author comes out of the bathroom, drying himself. At that moment, he hears the footsteps of someone walking downstairs near the dining table. He wakes up his brother Herman. They both listen to the footsteps and gets scared. Their mother wakes up. When she comes to know she alerts her neighbour to call the police. The police arrive with some reporters. They search all over, upstairs and downstairs. When they find nothing, they rush to the attic. The narrator’s grandfather believes that he is still in the war. He thinks that the policemen are deserters. So he starts shooting at them. The policemen leave their house immediately, creating a lot of confusion everywhere.

31.	Technology impacts the environment, people and the society as a whole. The way we use technology determines if its impacts are positive to the society or negative. We use mobile phones, tablet, Digital Dictionary, e-Book reader and video games as the latest technology. All these are useful to make our work easier. It makes us to keep in touch with our family members by talking to them, whenever we want to. We can see our relatives, who live far away from us. It also helps us to make friends, communicate with them and control our environment. It can help us to study, get qualifications and find opportunities for work. It can make us confident and independent. Learning has now become a more inclusive way for us by this technology.

32.	In honour of his last French lesson, M. Hamel put on his fine Sunday clothes and the old villagers were present to respect his forty years of faithful service. In the classroom, Hamel told Franz that the Prussians would find fault with the Frenchmen that they did not know to read or write French. As he spoke about many things, he said that French was the language to be held and guarded to be used as a key to the prison of the enslaved. He took a grammar lesson, a lesson in writing and kept gazing at the garden and the classroom where he had spent 40 years of his life. When the trumpets of the Prussians were finally blown, M. Hamel stood up, but could not speak out of grief and wrote “Long Live France” in French on the blackboard and dismissed the school.

SECTION - 2
33.	In this poem, life is described not as an entity, but as an experience. One should live with courage and dedication. Life should be lived without hurry and with a clear sense of purpose that drives the mind and soul. The poet encourages us to let go of all that has been lost in the past as well as the uncertainty the future holds. He tells us to embrace the present with the happiness which nourishes the young and the old. Happiness gives us nourishment on this journey with a smile on our face. Whatever situation life throws at us, it is the journey, he hopes, that should be joyous, for it teaches us to grow and live. Our imagination should have the innocence and fearlessness of childhood. We should seek out new friendships, new adventures and new experiences which enrich us. He encourages us to have faith and determination in our hearts, as we take on this beautiful journey. We should have eternal hope that our story ends most joyfully.

34.	The poem "No Men are Foreign' has a greater relevance in today's world that witnesses major disasters due to internal conflicts and external factors that destroy the peace of the nations of the world. Factors like racism, terrorism etc., alienate people to the extent of ruining places and civilizations, that had taken centuries of hard work to be built. The very fact that, once we consider the entire world as a single living place for all who exist on it, it becomes a common place and people will stay united, understanding the truth that all are human with the same dreams and aspirations.

35.	
(a) The rhyming words are : cold - scold; meet - street
(b)	Rhyme scheme : “a a b b”.
(c)	Transferred epithet (Complaining street)
(d)	The alliterating words : summer - scold.

36.	Machines aren’t perfect after all and Nature always wins over. Machines aren’t miraculous creation. They are nothing more than the creation of the human brain.

SECTION - 3
37.	(iii), (v), (iv), (i), (ii)
(iii)	Little Peter was asked to take cakes for his blind friend by his mother.
(i)	While returning, he hears water trickling from the dikes.
(iv)	Peter realises the danger of flooding.
(i)	Peter stops the angry waters with his finger the entire night and saves the village.
(ii)	Peter becomes the Little Hero of Holland.
38.	(a)	Zigzag's voice was clear and commanding.
(b)	Bored and grumpy.
(c)	An African witch doctor and Dr. Somu.
(d)	Dr. Krishnan's clinic became a calm place without confusion.
(e)	Zigzag never slept or snored even for a second.

SECTION - 4
39.	
ANBU BOOK SHOP
10%	 A collection of Rare books
OFFER  More than 2000 Books
for school  Story and Fiction
children  10 Languages
No. 10, AVILA Convent Road, Ooty

40.	From Rani,
216, Nethaji Street, Remote Village, Villupuram District.
02nd April 2025
To
The Coordinator, Aspire IAS Academy, Habibullah Road, Chennai.
Sir,
Sub : Further details on IAS coaching - reg.
Ref : Advertisement cited in the newspaper.
I have read your news in a Tamil Newspaper and I am an IAS aspirant. I have understood the news and I need much more details of your IAS training course as I am studying X std now.
I request you to guide me in my endeavour and send further information and details at the earliest, Sir.
Thank you. Yours sincerely, Rani
Address on the envelope :
To
The Coordinator, Aspire IAS Academy,
Habibullah Road, Chennai.

41.	
NOTICE
GOVT. HIGHER SECONDARY SCHOOL, SATHUR
Trip to Papanasam
02nd April, 2025
All the students are informed that our school is planning a trip to Papanasam for two days on 25th and 26th April 2025. A private omnibus has been arranged. The amount will be ` 1,200 per student, which includes food expense. Students, who participate, should come in school uniform. The Govt. guest house is arranged for our stay. Interested students can register their names with the undersigned and the amount is to be paid on or before 20th April 2025.
XXX,

42.
1. The image shows crowded fair exhibitions with many people enjoying the attractions.
2.	There are stalls, amusement rides, and food vendors, creating a lively and festive atmosphere.
3.	The presence of banners and decorations suggests a special event or celebration.
4.	People of all ages can be seen exploring different activities, indicating a place of entertainment and social gathering.
5.	Overall, the scene reflects joy, excitement, and a vibrant cultural experience.

43.	Note Making :
Mountain Climbing
Exciting but Risky :
■	Requires courage and adventure
■	Breathing gets harder at high altitudes
Dangers and challenges :
■	Snowstorms, blizzards, extreme cold
■	Ice makes climbing difficult
■	Risk of frostbite and exhaustion Skills and preparation :
■	Needs proper training and physical fitness
■	Must carry maps, compasses, ropes, and first- aid kits
Climbing conditions :
■	Travel through forests, steep rocks, and glaciers
■	Use ropes for safety in dangerous area Teamwork and Endurance :
■	Climbers move in groups for safety
■	Show courage, teamwork and perseverance

44.	
(a) Rice is the staple food of Asians.
a.	Because Sathya was old, he walked slowly.
b.	Slow and steady wins the race.
c.	I will be fifteen next April.
d.	Learning a language is always useful.

45.	She’s a lioness; don’t mess with her. She’ll not spare you if you’re a prankster.
Don’t ever try to saw her pride, her self-respect. She knows how to thaw you, saw you – so beware! She’s today’s woman. Today’s woman, dear.

46.	(a) Many years ago, In China, the Emperor ordered that one man from each family must join the army. Mulan heard it and told her father. She wanted to join the army. Her father objected to it as she was a girl. She wore her father’s robes and cut her hair. She convinced him. Earlier she had learnt Kung Fu from him. She told that no one would find her as a girl. She left the village and joined the army. She fought bravely in the war. She became the General of the army. Very soon, a fever swept the army. Mulan fell sick. When the doctor examined her, he found the truth and spread the news in the army. Everyone objected to following a girl leader. Just then, a battle came. With a good plan, she commanded the soldiers. They followed her and attacked their enemies and won the battle. The Emperor was glad. He offered her a position of a Royal Adviser in his palace but she refused. Then the Emperor gifted her with six horses and six swords. Mulan went back to her village.
Moral : Sacrifice is the ultimate patriotism of any soldier - incomparable.

(b) The year is 2889 and the date is 25th July. The story takes place in the office block of the managing editor of the Earth Herald, the world’s largest newspaper. Francis Bennett awoke in a bad temper. He saw his wife appear in the telephotic mirror. Francis went to the reporter’s room. One of the Earth Herald’s astronomers had just determined the elements of the new planet Gandini. Francis then went to his accumulator works at Niagara in his aerocar. He gets the news from his wife that she is coming to Centropolis by tube which travels from Paris in two hundred and ninety-five minutes, which only manage six hundred miles an hour.

47.(a)(i) American President Theodore Roosevelt participated in a bear-hunting trip in Mississippi.
(ii)	Morris Michtom placed the stuffed bears in the front window of his shop.
(iii)	The news that spread around the country was that Theodore Roosevelt refused to kill a bear they had captured, considering the behaviour of the other hunters unsportsmanlike.
(iv)	The shop owner was Morris Michtom. He created plush, stuffed bears and placed them in the front window of his shop.
(OR)
(b)	(i)  It is hard to decide which career to choose.
(ii)	Dancer, doctor, teacher, cricketer and navy officer.
(iii)	The days of the week mentioned in the poem are:
(a)	Sunday (b) Thursday
(iv)	I would like to become a doctor because I want to help people and save lives.

